add peft merging blog post. (#1816)
huggingface/blog: peft_merging.md

Let’s go through an example. Consider 2 LoRA adapters $(A_1, B_1)$ & $(A_2, B_2)$ along with weights $weight_1$ and $weight_2$ for weighted merging of these two adapters, then the merging happens as follows:

$A_{merged} = sqrt(weight_1 * scaling_1) * A_1+ sqrt (weight_2 * scaling_2) * A_2$

$B_{merged} = sqrt(weight_1 * scaling_1) * B_1+ sqrt (weight_2 * scaling_2) * B_2$

For more details, please refer to the [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.04089).

### SVD (`svd`)

Instead of considering individual matrices $A$ and $B$ as task weights, their product $BA$ which is the delta weight is considered the task weight. 

Let’s continue with the example from the previous sub-sections. Here, first the delta weight of merged combination is computed as follows:

$delta_{merged} = weight_1 * scaling_1 * B_1A_1 + weight_2 * scaling_2 * B_2A_2$

> After getting the above-merged delta weight, SVD (singular value decomposition) is applied to get the approximates $A_{merged\_approx}$ and $B_{merged\_approx}$:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After getting the above-merged delta weight, SVD (singular value decomposition) is applied to get the approximates $A_{merged-approx}$ and $B_{merged-approx}$:
```

$B_{merged} = concat(B_1, B_2, dim=1)$

where $shape(A_{merged}) = (rank_1+rank_2,\ d)$ and $shape(B_{merged}) = (d,\ rank_1+rank_2)$. 

Now, the output of this new merged LoRA layer would be as if the original 2 LoRAs were active with weights $weight_1$ and $weight_2$ for applied to the first and second adapters, respectively.

$h = W_0x + B_{merged}A_{merged}x$

Here, we can observe that:

$B_{merged}A_{merged} = weight_1 * scaling_1 * B_1A_1 + weight_2 * scaling_2 * B_2A_2$

<div style="background-color: #e6f9e6; padding: 16px 32px; outline: 2px solid; border-radius: 5px;">
🧠 This is the exact weighted merging of LoRA adapters. It is also available via <a href=https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/tutorials/using_peft_for_inference>PEFT integration of Diffusers</a> when you call <code>set_adapters()</code>  wherein instead of creating a new merged adapter, the active adapters are combined sequentially, as shown on the right-hand side of the above equation. When using this method, it allows for participating LoRA adapters to have different ranks.
</div>

### Linear/Task Arithmetic (`linear`)

> In this method, the LoRA matrices are involved in weighted sum. This is what the Task arithmetic paper implements on task weights. In task arithmetic, one first computes the task weights which is difference betweeen finetuned weights and base model weights, then do a weighted sum of these task weights. Here, the delta weights considered are the individual matrices $A$ and $B$ instead of their product $BA$. This method can be applied only when all the participating LoRA adapters have same rank.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this method, the LoRA matrices are involved in weighted sum. This is what the Task arithmetic paper implements on task weights. In task arithmetic, one first computes the task weights which is difference between finetuned weights and base model weights, then does a weighted sum of these task weights. Here, the delta weights considered are the individual matrices $A$ and $B$ instead of their product $BA$. This method can be applied only when all the participating LoRA adapters have same rank.
```

$A_{merged} = sqrt(weight_1 * scaling_1) * A_1+ sqrt (weight_2 * scaling_2) * A_2$

$B_{merged} = sqrt(weight_1 * scaling_1) * B_1+ sqrt (weight_2 * scaling_2) * B_2$

For more details, please refer to the paper: [Editing Models with Task Arithmetic](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.04089).

### SVD (`svd`)

Instead of considering individual matrices $A$ and $B$ as task weights, their product $BA$ which is the delta weight is considered the task weight. 

Let’s continue with the example from the previous sub-sections. Here, first the delta weight of merged combination is computed as follows:

$delta_{merged} = weight_1 * scaling_1 * B_1A_1 + weight_2 * scaling_2 * B_2A_2$

After getting the above-merged delta weight, SVD (singular value decomposition) is applied to get the approximates $A_{merged-approx}$ and $B_{merged-approx}$:

<div align="center">
<img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/peft_merging/svd_full_eqn.jpg" width=300/>
</div><br>

<div style="background-color: #e6f9e6; padding: 16px 32px; outline: 2px solid; border-radius: 5px;">

> 🧠 Similar to <code>cat</code> method, this method also allows for LoRA adapters with different rank. In addition one can choose the rank for the resultant merged LoRA adapter which defaults to the maximum rank among the participating LoRA adapters. A limitation of this approach is that it require a lot of GPU memory for performing the SVD operation.

Reviewer 2: Minor typos.
```suggestion
🧠 Similar to <code>cat</code> method, this method also allows for LoRA adapters with different ranks. In addition, one can choose the rank for the resultant merged LoRA adapter which defaults to the maximum rank among the participating LoRA adapters. A limitation of this approach is that it requires a lot of GPU memory for performing the SVD operation.
```

</div>

### TIES (`ties` , `ties_svd` )

> This builds upon the `linear` and `svd` methods by changing the way merged adapters are computed from task weights and result in the `ties` and `ties_svd` methods, respectively. In TIES (TRIM, ELECT SIGN & MERGE), one first computes the task weights which in our case would be the LoRA adapters $A$, $B$ for non svd variant and their product $BA$ for svd variant. After this, you prune the smallest values of the task weights and retain the top-k values based on the specified fraction `density` . Then, you calculate the majority sign mask from the participating pruned task weights, multiple task tensors with the user provided weightage followed by disjoint merge based on the majority sign mask. For majority sing mask computation, you have two options:

Reviewer 2: Minor typos.
```suggestion
This builds upon the `linear` and `svd` methods by changing the way merged adapters are computed from task weights and result in the `ties` and `ties_svd` methods, respectively. In TIES (TRIM, ELECT SIGN & MERGE), one first computes the task weights which in our case would be the LoRA adapters $A$, $B$ for non svd variant and their product $BA$ for svd variant. After this, you prune the smallest values of the task weights and retain the top-k values based on the specified fraction `density` . Then, you calculate the majority sign mask from the participating pruned task weights, multiple task tensors with the user provided weightage followed by disjoint merge based on the majority sign mask. For majority sign mask computation, you have two options:
```

> 1. `total`  which considers the magnitude as well as sign when calculating the majority sign 
> 2. `frequency` which considers only the sign of the value when calculating the majority sign.

Reviewer 2: I have added details on how to implement `total` and `frequency` options to make it more intuitive.
Maybe it is better to understand?
```suggestion
1. `total` considers the magnitude as well as sign to get the majority sign, i.e., sum up all the corresponding weights;
2. `frequency` only considers the weight sign to obtain the majority sign, i.e., sum up the sign of all the corresponding weights.
```

For more details, refer to the paper: [TIES-Merging: Resolving Interference When Merging Models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01708).

### DARE (`dare_linear` , `dare_ties` , `dare_linear_svd` , `dare_ties_svd` )

> This also builds upon the `linear` and `svd` methods wherein the task weights are LoRA adapters $A$, $B$ for non svd variant and their product $BA$ for svd variant. In `DARE` method proposed in [Language Models are Super Mario: Absorbing Abilities from Homologous Models as a Free Lunch](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.03099), you first prune randomly the values of the task weight based on the specified fraction `density`. After this, you rescale the pruned task weights. Then, you carry out weighted sum of task tensors based on user specified weightage for participating LoRA adapters.
> 
> This corresponds to the `*_linear*` variants of the DARE method following the original paper. 

Reviewer 2: I have rewritten this part by pointing out that `DARE` is a general plug-in and can be applied to any existing model merging methods including `linear` and `ties`. I have also revised the usage of `density` for `DARE`. 
Maybe this looks better? 
```suggestion
This also builds upon the `linear` and `svd` methods wherein the task weights are LoRA adapters $A$, $B$ for non svd variant and their product $BA$ for svd variant. `DARE` method proposed in [Language Models are Super Mario: Absorbing Abilities from Homologous Models as a Free Lunch](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.03099) first randomly prunes the values of the task weight based on the specified fraction `1-density`, and then rescales the pruned task weights by `1/density`. `DARE` is a general plug-in and can be applied to any existing model merging methods. We have implemented `DARE` with Linear/Task Arithmetic (`*_linear*`) and TIES (`*_ties*`).

For `*_linear*` variants of `DARE`, we first use `DARE` to randomly prune task weights and then perform weighted sum of task tensors based on user specified weightage for participating LoRA adapters.
```

> In `*_ties*`  variant, instead of a simple weighted sum post random pruning, it follows the last 2 steps of ties, i.e., calculating majority sing mask and then using that to compute disjoint merge of the task weights.

Reviewer 2: I have also rewritten this part.
```suggestion
For `*_ties*`  variants of `DARE`, we first use `DARE` to get the pruned task weights, then adopt the last 2 steps of `ties`, i.e., calculating majority sign mask and using the mask to perform disjoint merge of the task weights.
```

2. In you want to explore or `cat` isn’t working, try `linear` , `maginuted_prune`  and `dare_linear` in that order. For `maginuted_prune`  and `dare_linear`, we found that higher `density`  values around 0.7-0.8 work better.
3. When using `ties`, we found that in many cases `majority_sign_method="frequency"`  to perform better than `majority_sign_method="total"` (`total` is currently the default). For ties, a good default value for `density`  is 0.5. You can then try tuning this lower or higher based on your observations post merging the adapters.
4. `dare_ties`  wasn’t giving good results. 
5. When working with Stable Diffusion LoRA adapters that have different ranks, you can try the `*svd`  family of methods. Note that these require more GPU memory and take around ~1.5 minutes to create the merged adapter due to the expensive SVD operations. `ties_svd`  gave good result when combining `subject`  + `style`  LoRAs as seen in an example above. When combining 2 `style` adapters, `dare_linear`  with high `density`  or `ties`  with `majority_sign_method="frequency"`  seems to work better as seen in the examples above.

## Acknowledgements

> We’re grateful to Le Yu and Prateek Yadav, authors of DARE and TIES, for their generous feedback and guidance on the [PR](https://github.com/huggingface/peft/pull/1364). To honor their efforts, we have added them as the co-authors of the PR. Thanks to Prateek for reviewing the blog post draft as well.

Author: ```suggestion
We’re grateful to Le Yu and Prateek Yadav, authors of DARE and TIES, for their generous feedback and guidance on the [PR](https://github.com/huggingface/peft/pull/1364). To honor their efforts, we have added them as the co-authors of the PR. Thanks to Prateek and Le for reviewing the blog post draft as well.
```

4. [mergekit](https://github.com/cg123/mergekit): Tools for merging pretrained large language models.
5. [PEFT integration in Diffusers](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/tutorials/using_peft_for_inference)
6. [Model merging guide for PEFT users](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/developer_guides/model_merging)

## Citations

```
@inproceedings{
    ilharco2023editing,
    title={Editing models with task arithmetic},
    author={Gabriel Ilharco and Marco Tulio Ribeiro and Mitchell Wortsman and Ludwig Schmidt and Hannaneh Hajishirzi and Ali Farhadi},
    booktitle={The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations },
    year={2023},
    url={https://openreview.net/forum?id=6t0Kwf8-jrj}
}
```

```
@inproceedings{
    yadav2023tiesmerging,
    title={{TIES}-Merging: Resolving Interference When Merging Models},
    author={Prateek Yadav and Derek Tam and Leshem Choshen and Colin Raffel and Mohit Bansal},
    booktitle={Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems},
    year={2023},
    url={https://openreview.net/forum?id=xtaX3WyCj1}
}
```

```

> @misc{yu2024language,
>     title={Language Models are Super Mario: Absorbing Abilities from Homologous Models as a Free Lunch}, 
>     author={Le Yu and Bowen Yu and Haiyang Yu and Fei Huang and Yongbin Li},
>     year={2024},
>     eprint={2311.03099},
>     archivePrefix={arXiv},
>     primaryClass={cs.CL}
> }

Reviewer 2: The first version of `DARE` is available in 2023, and I have revised the year of BibTeX to 2023 ^_^.
```suggestion
@misc{yu2023language,
    title={Language Models are Super Mario: Absorbing Abilities from Homologous Models as a Free Lunch}, 
    author={Le Yu and Bowen Yu and Haiyang Yu and Fei Huang and Yongbin Li},
    year={2023},
    eprint={2311.03099},
    archivePrefix={arXiv},
    primaryClass={cs.CL}
}
```

</div>

### Linear/Task Arithmetic (`linear`)

In this method, the LoRA matrices are involved in weighted sum. This is what the Task arithmetic paper implements on task weights. In task arithmetic, one first computes the task weights which is difference betweeen finetuned weights and base model weights, then do a weighted sum of these task weights. Here, the delta weights considered are the individual matrices $A$ and $B$ instead of their product $BA$. This method can be applied only when all the participating LoRA adapters have same rank.

Let’s go through an example. Consider 2 LoRA adapters $(A_1, B_1)$ & $(A_2, B_2)$ along with weights $weight_1$ and $weight_2$ for weighted merging of these two adapters, then the merging happens as follows:

$A_{merged} = sqrt(weight_1 * scaling_1) * A_1+ sqrt (weight_2 * scaling_2) * A_2$

$B_{merged} = sqrt(weight_1 * scaling_1) * B_1+ sqrt (weight_2 * scaling_2) * B_2$

> For more details, please refer to the [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.04089).

Author: Fixed.

This corresponds to the `*_linear*` variants of the DARE method following the original paper. 

In `*_ties*`  variant, instead of a simple weighted sum post random pruning, it follows the last 2 steps of ties, i.e., calculating majority sing mask and then using that to compute disjoint merge of the task weights.

### Magnitude Prune (`magnitude_prune` , `magnitude_prune_svd` )

This also builds upon the `linear` and `svd` methods wherein the task weights are LoRA adapters $A$, $B$ for non svd variant and their product $BA$ for svd variant. In this method, you first prune the smallest values of the task weights and retain the top-k values based on the specified fraction `density`.  Then, you carry out the weighted sum of task tensors based on user-specified weightage for participating LoRA adapters.

## How do I merge my LoRA adapters?

In PEFT, when using LoRA, you can use the class method [`add_weighted_adapter()`](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/main/en/package_reference/lora#peft.LoraModel.add_weighted_adapter) to try the different combining methods. For example, below you can see how we can combine three LoRA adapters using `ties` method and the resulting generations:

> ![instruct_ad_sql](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/peft_merging/instruct_ad_sql.png)

Reviewer: Hello Prateek, I think from the TIES and DARE paper, the main motivation was that post-merging, the model is still able to retain the capabilities of individual models. Is that understanding correct?

Here, wrt LLM adapters, we are showing that they can retain the abilities of the original adapters post merging. For showcasing the merged capabilities, we have done this in a previous blogpost: https://huggingface.co/blog/personal-copilot#dance-of-loras. Here it made sense as one adapter was trained on custom codebase while the other was an instruction following adapter. So, the combined capability of using custom codebase adapter and instruct adapter to answer questions related to custom codebase would nicely.

For these set of LoRAs though, I don't see a usecase wherein all 3 are required as all three are independent tasks.

> ![instruct_ad_sql](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/peft_merging/instruct_ad_sql.png)

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the explanation @pacman100. It makes sense to show that abilities are retained for this blog post. However, in general, merging methods are also used for compositional generalization but given that it is hard to evaluate no such experiments are included in most papers but that is changing nowadays.  

I guess for this post it still makes sense but better to clarify that you are showing that the model is able to retain both abilities.

> ![instruct_ad_sql](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/peft_merging/instruct_ad_sql.png)

Reviewer: > A reader would expect something like what you have for the SD case where you show the response from the merged model as well.

All of these examples are outputs from the merged model showing that the performance is intact on the individual tasks.

Adding the following example showcasing the usecase wherein capabilities of both the adapters being merged are required.
![Screenshot 2024-02-16 at 1 54 14 PM](https://github.com/huggingface/blog/assets/13534540/8971462d-3def-4616-ba41-f4a1a43cce3f)

## Useful links

1. [Editing Models with Task Arithmetic](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.04089)
2. [TIES-Merging: Resolving Interference When Merging Models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01708)
3. [Language Models are Super Mario: Absorbing Abilities from Homologous Models as a Free Lunch](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.03099)
4. [mergekit](https://github.com/cg123/mergekit): Tools for merging pretrained large language models.
5. [PEFT integration in Diffusers](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/tutorials/using_peft_for_inference)
6. [Model merging guide for PEFT users](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/developer_guides/model_merging)

## Citations

```
@misc{ilharco2023editing,
      title={Editing Models with Task Arithmetic}, 
      author={Gabriel Ilharco and Marco Tulio Ribeiro and Mitchell Wortsman and Suchin Gururangan and Ludwig Schmidt and Hannaneh Hajishirzi and Ali Farhadi},
      year={2023},
      eprint={2212.04089},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.LG}

> }

Reviewer 3: For published papers, it's better to use the citation from the conference proceedings. Here is the citation for Task Arithmetic.

```
@inproceedings{
ilharco2023editing,
title={Editing models with task arithmetic},
author={Gabriel Ilharco and Marco Tulio Ribeiro and Mitchell Wortsman and Ludwig Schmidt and Hannaneh Hajishirzi and Ali Farhadi},
booktitle={The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations },
year={2023},
url={https://openreview.net/forum?id=6t0Kwf8-jrj}
}
```

```

```
@misc{yadav2023tiesmerging,
    title={TIES-Merging: Resolving Interference When Merging Models}, 
    author={Prateek Yadav and Derek Tam and Leshem Choshen and Colin Raffel and Mohit Bansal},
    year={2023},
    eprint={2306.01708},
    archivePrefix={arXiv},
    primaryClass={cs.LG}

> }

Reviewer 3: Similarly for TIES, 

```
@inproceedings{
      yadav2023tiesmerging,
      title={{TIES}-Merging: Resolving Interference When Merging Models},
      author={Prateek Yadav and Derek Tam and Leshem Choshen and Colin Raffel and Mohit Bansal},
      booktitle={Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems},
      year={2023},
      url={https://openreview.net/forum?id=xtaX3WyCj1}
}
```
